Introduction

Benefits of Pursuing a STEM Higher Education

Pursuing a STEM-related (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) degree offers college graduates significant financial benefits and career advancement opportunities. A recent NCSES report (2023) shows that graduates with at least a bachelor's degree in a STEM discipline have considerably higher salaries compared to graduates with non-STEM degrees, with STEM workers earning a $20,000 higher median salary than those in non-STEM careers (NSF, 2022; NCSES, 2023). In addition to financial benefits (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2023), STEM fields promote critical thinking, problem solving, and innovation, which make recent graduates highly competitive on the job market (NSB, 2024). STEM college graduates are well-positioned to earn high salaries and experience significant career growth given the strong financial benefits and job growth in these fields. 

Lack of Diversity in STEM Fields

Despite these clear benefits, certain groups remain underrepresented in STEM. Equitable access to career opportunities is central to the mission of higher education, yet gaps in representation persist among racially minoritized students, women, first-generation students, and students from low-income backgrounds (Fry, Kennedy, & Funk, 2021; Graham et al., 2013; Oyelaran, 2023). We see these disparities in college degree completion rates as well as salary outcomes, where women and other racially minoritized groups consistently earn less than those in majority groups (XXXX). Similarly, first-generation and low-income students face additional barriers to persistence in STEM. 

Gateway Courses as Barriers

Introductory or “gateway” STEM courses, such as Calculus I and Physics I, are widely considered “weed-out” courses that significantly influence student persistence in STEM degrees (XXXX). Successfully completing introductory courses is a strong predictor of persistence in STEM majors. Academic performance in these introductory courses could impact the outcome expectations associated with pursuing a STEM degree. For instance, students struggling to pass Calculus I may think the long-term benefits of pursuing a degree and eventual career in STEM does not outweigh the challenges they are currently facing, further widening equity gaps in degree attainment and entry into STEM fields. 

Traditionally, higher education institutions have implemented a variety of academic support interventions (e.g., proactive academic advising, role model and/or peer mentorship, tutoring, instructor and TA office hours, summer bridge programs) to enhance student performance and persistence in degree programs (XXXXX). While these interventions have been shown to be effective, they may also be time and resource-intensive to implement. It also remains unclear which approach or combination of approaches is most effective in addressing outcome expectations of underrepresented students, particularly in STEM gateway courses (Dyer-Barr, 2014). 

To address this gap, this study uses a novel approach to identify which interventions are most effective in supporting underrepresented students in gateway STEM courses such as Calculus I, a prerequisite for many STEM majors. This study combines two methods including, optimization strategies and generative agent-based modeling (GABM). First, I will use optimization strategies to test and compare many possible interventions using student demographic data and taking into account various constraints like budget, time, and institutional resources. This will allow me to determine which intervention is the most effective yet feasible to implement given these factors. Next, I will create generative student agents, which are LLM-driven simulations built from open-ended survey data collected from real students enrolled in Calculus I. Because these student agents are built from actual real student data and powered by artificial intelligence, they will respond and behave in ways that the real students would. The simulated student agents will undergo different interventions so I can observe and analyze how they respond to differing interventions and how it might impact their outcome expectations. To ensure validity, I will implement one real intervention with students enrolled in a Calculus I course and compare their survey responses to those of the simulated agents. 

By combining optimization and generative agent modeling, the purpose of this study is to identify an intervention that both accounts for the study’s constraints and is effective in improving the outcome expectations of underrepresented students in gateway STEM courses. This study is guided by the following research questions: 
